Document fault-tolerant execution (#11404)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/admin/fault-tolerant-execution.rst

========================
Fault-tolerant execution
========================

By default, if a Trino node lacks the resources to execute on a task or
otherwise fails during query execution, the query fails and must be run again
manually. The longer the runtime of a query, the more likely it is to be
susceptible to such failures.

Fault-tolerant execution is a mechanism in Trino that enables a cluster to
mitigate query failures by retrying queries or their component tasks in
the event of failure. With fault-tolerant execution enabled, in-progress query
data is spooled and can be re-used by another worker in the event of a worker
outage or other fault during query execution.

.. note::

    Fault tolerance does not apply to user error. For example, a query that

>     fails because its SQL cannot be parsed is not fault-tolerant.

Reviewer: It feel weird for me to say that query is is not fault tolerant. The way it is executed is or is not.
And in this case we want to say that if query is inherently broken (cannot be executed because it is misdefined) we will not loop trying to retry it (or retry its tasks).

Author: Makes sense, reworded

Configuration
-------------

Fault-tolerant execution is disabled by default. To enable the feature, set the
``retry-policy`` configuration property to either ``QUERY`` or ``TASK``

> depending on the desired :ref:`retry policy <fte-retry-policy>`.

Reviewer: Technically we can also enable fault tolerance using `retry_policy` session property. But I am not convinced we want to advertise this possibility in documentation. 
WDYT @arhimondr

Author: We should consider adding that session property to the `retry-policy` entry I added in `properties-query-management.rst` for completeness, and just not mention it in this page. Unless there's an active reason to dissuade people from using the session property, in which case it should also be marked as "experimental" or equivalent in the engine.

Reviewer: IDK. The session property (I think) is there mostly for ease of testing. So we can easily switch the logic and compare behaviour. I would make session property hidden and not document it. WDYT @arhimondr @linzebing ?

Author: I think it's important to have in the properties reference just so people who stumble on the property with `SHOW SESSION` can find an explanation in the docs.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I agree with @losipiuk . Currently the system is not designed to properly handle queries with `retry_policy=NONE|QUERY` and `retry_policy=TASK` running on the same cluster in parallel. Generally our advice should be to deploy a dedicated cluster with `retry_policy=TASK` enabled. Queries running with `retry_policy=QUERY` can coexist with queries running with `retry_policy=NONE`.

Also it feels like it is worth mentioning the tradeoffs when choosing between `QUERY` and `TASK`. 

- `QUERY` - doesn't spool intermediate data and execution is exactly the same as for `NONE`, but in case of a failure the entire query will be transparently restarted.
- `TASK` - requires spooling of intermediate data. Changes execution strategy. For `TASK` a dedicated cluster must be deployed and all query on a given cluster have to be run with `retry_policy=TASK`

Author: Got it, that makes sense why we would want to discourage use of the session property. In that case, is there a way to prevent the `retry_policy` session property from appearing as a result of `SHOW SESSION`?

Reviewer 2: That's a good point. People might still want to enable `retry_policy=QUERY` for certain queries but it seems to be a lesser evil. https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/11480

Author: Perfect, thanks. Removed the `retry_policy` session property from this PR.

.. code-block:: properties

    retry-policy=QUERY

The following configuration properties control the behavior of fault-tolerant
execution on a Trino cluster:

.. list-table:: Fault-tolerant execution configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
   * - ``retry-policy``
     - Configures what is retried in the event of failure, either
       ``QUERY`` to retry the whole query, or ``TASK`` to retry tasks
       individually if they fail. See :ref:`retry policy <fte-retry-policy>` for
       more information.
     - ``NONE``
   * - ``exchange.deduplication-buffer-size``
     - Size of the buffer for data sent from worker nodes to the coordinator. If

>        this buffer is exceeded, the query fails. This buffer is not used if an

Reviewer: This is not accurate. We still use the buffer even if exchange is configured. But only with exchange we can handle the case when we run out of space in the buffer and fall-back to spilling data into persistent storage.

Author: Fixed. Is it true that a query fails if the it causes the buffer to be exceeded, without an exchange manager fall-back configured?

Reviewer: yes

       :ref:`exchange manager <fte-exchange-manager>` is configured.
     - ``32MB``

.. _fte-retry-policy:

Retry policy
------------

The ``retry-policy`` configuration property designates whether Trino retries
entire queries or a query's individual tasks in the event of failure.

QUERY
^^^^^

A query retry policy instructs Trino to automatically retry a query in the
event of an error occuring on a worker node. A query retry policy is recommended
when the majority of the Trino cluster's workload consists of many small
queries, or if an :ref:`exchange manager <fte-exchange-manager>` is not
configured.

By default Trino does not implement fault tolerance for queries whose result set

> exceeds 32MB in size, such as :doc:`/sql/select` statements on a very large data

Reviewer: data set can be large. The important part of that how much of that we are returning to the user. E.g we can still easily compute small aggregate over something very huge.

set. This limit can be increased by modifying the
``exchange.deduplication-buffer-size`` configuration property to be greater than

> the default value of ``32MB``, but this may result in higher memory

Reviewer: `may result` -> `will result`

Reviewer 3: If it definitely will, then it is just "results in"

utilization on the coordinator.

To enable fault-tolerant execution on queries with a larger result set, it is
strongly recommended to configure an :ref:`exchange manager
<fte-exchange-manager>` that utilizes external storage for spooled data and

> therefore bypasses the need for a buffer.

Reviewer: `therefore bypasses the need for a buffer.` -> `therefore allows for keeping in-memory buffer small`.

   * - ``fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory``
     - Initial task memory estimation used for bin-packing when allocating nodes
       for tasks. May be overridden for the current session with the
       ``fault_tolerant_execution_task_memory``
       :ref:`session property <session-properties-definition>`.
     - ``4GB``

Other tuning
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following additional configuration properties can be used to manage
fault-tolerant execution:

.. list-table:: Other fault-tolerant execution configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
     - Retry policy
   * - ``fault-tolerant-execution-task-descriptor-storage-max-memory``
     - Maximum amount of memory to be used to store task descriptors for fault
       tolerant queries on coordinator. Extra memory is needed to be able to
       reschedule tasks in case of a failure.
     - (JVM heap size * 0.15)
     - Only ``TASK``

.. _fte-exchange-manager:

Exchange manager
----------------

Exchange spooling is responsible for storaging and managing spooled data for
fault-tolerant execution. By default, spooled data is stored in the coordinator

> node's memory and is subject to memory resource limits. You can configure a

Reviewer: The note about in-memory is storage is only true for workers->coordinator communication. Not for exchanges between stages executing on workers. 
Personally I would drop. Above we explain the `exchange.deduplication-buffer-size` and how it influences query-based retries. Rephrasing it here will just add confusion imo.

filesystem-based exchange manager that stores spooled data in a specified
location, either a local filesystem or an S3-compatible storage server.

To configure an exchange manager, create a new ``exchange-manager.properties``
configuration file on the coordinator, such as
``etc/exchange-manager.properties``. In this file, set the
``exchange-manager.name`` configuration propertry to ``filesystem``, and
additional configuration properties as needed for your storage solution.

.. list-table:: Exchange manager configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
   * - ``exchange.base-directory``
     - The base directory URI location that the exchange manager uses to store

>        spooling data.

Reviewer: We should probalby say here (or somewhere else) that currently only `s3*://` and local filesystems are supported

     -
   * - ``exchange.encryption-enabled``
     - Enable encrypting of spooling data.

>      - ``false``

Reviewer: @linzebing should be enable encryption by default. safety-first?

Reviewer 4: Make sense, let me add a commit to do this.

Author: Updated here in doc

       pool size, the larger the write parallelism and memory usage.
     - ``10``
   * - ``exchange.source-concurrent-reader``
     - The number of concurrent readers to read from spooling storage. The
       larger the number of concurrent readers, the larger the read parallelism
       and memory usage.
     - ``4``
   * - ``exchange.s3.aws-access-key``
     - AWS access key to use.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.aws-secret-key``
     - AWS secret key to use.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.region``
     - Region of the S3 bucket.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.endpoint``
     - S3 storage endpoint server if using an S3-compatible storage system that
       is not AWS. If using AWS S3, can be ignored.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.max-error-retries``
     - Maximum number of times the exchange manager's S3 client should retry
       a request.
     - ``3``
   * - ``exchange.s3.upload.part-size``
     - Part size for S3 multi-part upload.
     - ``5MB``

The following example ``exchange-manager.properties`` configuration specifies a
local directory, ``/tmp/trino-exchange-manager``, as the spooling storage
destination. Note that a local directory can only be used in a standalone

> environment, not in a distributed cluster.

Reviewer: For testing purposes it should also work with distributed cluster if directory is shared (e.g via NFS of SMB) and accessible from all worker nodes.

Author: I added this as an explicit note bubble for now, but do we want to actually dissuade using a local filesystem for exchange, or is it just not useful for production clusters?

Reviewer: Probably it is not useful for production clusters. It was not built with prod clusters in mind but for demos and testing.

.. code-block:: properties

    exchange-manager.name=filesystem

>     exchange.base-directory=/tmp/trino-exchange-manager

Reviewer: I would move below s3 example. As this is not very useful in real deployment scenarios.

Author: Good idea, done

outage or other fault during query execution.

.. note::

    Fault tolerance does not apply to broken queries or other user error. For
    example, Trino does not spend resources retrying a query that fails because
    its SQL cannot be parsed.

Configuration
-------------

Fault-tolerant execution is disabled by default. To enable the feature, set the
``retry-policy`` configuration property to either ``QUERY`` or ``TASK``
depending on the desired :ref:`retry policy <fte-retry-policy>`.

.. code-block:: properties

    retry-policy=QUERY

The following configuration properties control the behavior of fault-tolerant
execution on a Trino cluster:

.. list-table:: Fault-tolerant execution configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
   * - ``retry-policy``
     - Configures what is retried in the event of failure, either
       ``QUERY`` to retry the whole query, or ``TASK`` to retry tasks
       individually if they fail. See :ref:`retry policy <fte-retry-policy>` for
       more information.
     - ``NONE``
   * - ``exchange.deduplication-buffer-size``

>      - Size of the buffer for data sent from worker nodes to the coordinator. If

Author: As I understand it's a buffer in memory on the coordinator that's used to store exchange data that it can re-send to a worker node in the event of failure, to continue the query. So by that logic I believe it's a grand total for any one query.

Would appreciate clarification on that if I'm wrong though @losipiuk @linzebing

>      - Size of the buffer for data sent from worker nodes to the coordinator. If

Reviewer 4: The buffer is used to store outputs of the coordinator stages. In two cases 32MB is not enough:
1. A SELECT query whose result size is larger than 32MB
2. An INSERT query that writes to a lot of files/partitions that the metadata of them exceeds 32MB

So actually 32MB is sufficient in most cases.

     - ``32MB``

.. _fte-retry-policy:

Retry policy
------------

The ``retry-policy`` configuration property designates whether Trino retries
entire queries or a query's individual tasks in the event of failure.

QUERY
^^^^^

A query retry policy instructs Trino to automatically retry a query in the
event of an error occuring on a worker node. A query retry policy is recommended
when the majority of the Trino cluster's workload consists of many small
queries, or if an :ref:`exchange manager <fte-exchange-manager>` is not
configured.

By default Trino does not implement fault tolerance for queries whose result set
exceeds 32MB in size, such as :doc:`/sql/select` statements that return a very
large data set to the user. This limit can be increased by modifying the
``exchange.deduplication-buffer-size`` configuration property to be greater than
the default value of ``32MB``, but this will result in higher memory
utilization on the coordinator.

To enable fault-tolerant execution on queries with a larger result set, it is
strongly recommended to configure an :ref:`exchange manager
<fte-exchange-manager>` that utilizes external storage for spooled data and

> therefore allows the in-memory buffer to be kept small.

Reviewer 4: Feels like it's better as:
```suggestion
therefore allows storing spilled data beyond the size of in-memory buffer.
```

> therefore allows the in-memory buffer to be kept small.

Author: For now I've just added it to the `properties-query-management.rst` entry since that's a standard place to put corresponding session properties. Can add it here too if there's consensus.

> therefore allows the in-memory buffer to be kept small.

Author: Follow-up, it sounds like the `retry_policy` session property can cause issues for the cluster when the policy is mismatched between sessions. This property was just made to be hidden from the user, so I removed it from this PR as well.

       catalogs report an incorrect split weight.

       May be overridden for the current session with the
       ``fault_tolerant_execution_min_task_split_count``
       :ref:`session property <session-properties-definition>`.
     - ``16``
   * - ``fault-tolerant-execution-max-task-split-count``
     - Maximum number of splits processed by single task. This value is not
       split weight-adjusted and serves as protection against situations where
       catalogs report an incorrect split weight.

       May be overridden for the current session with the
       ``fault_tolerant_execution_max_task_split_count``
       :ref:`session property <session-properties-definition>`.
     - ``256``

Node allocation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With a task retry policy, nodes are allocated to tasks based on available memory
and estimated memory usage. If task failure occurs due to exceeding available
memory on a node, the task is restarted with a request to allocate the full node
for its execution.

The initial task memory-requirements estimation is static and configured with
the ``fault-tolerant-task-memory`` configuration property. This property only
applies to a ``TASK`` retry policy.

> .. list-table:: Node allocation configuration properties

Author: Yes, I think it's helpful for visual consistency since it's still an "advanced properties" subsection

   :widths: 30, 40, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
   * - ``fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory``
     - Initial task memory estimation used for bin-packing when allocating nodes
       for tasks. May be overridden for the current session with the
       ``fault_tolerant_execution_task_memory``
       :ref:`session property <session-properties-definition>`.
     - ``4GB``

Other tuning
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The following additional configuration properties can be used to manage

Reviewer 3: property

One row table?

Author: Fixed. Also visual consistency as noted above.

fault-tolerant execution:

.. list-table:: Other fault-tolerant execution configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
     - Retry policy
   * - ``fault-tolerant-execution-task-descriptor-storage-max-memory``
     - Maximum amount of memory to be used to store task descriptors for fault
       tolerant queries on coordinator. Extra memory is needed to be able to
       reschedule tasks in case of a failure.
     - (JVM heap size * 0.15)
     - Only ``TASK``

.. _fte-exchange-manager:

Exchange manager
----------------

> Exchange spooling is responsible for storaging and managing spooled data for

Reviewer 4: storage -> storing

fault-tolerant execution. You can configure a filesystem-based exchange manager
that stores spooled data in a specified location, either an S3-compatible

> storage server or a local filesystem.

Reviewer 4: server -> system

To configure an exchange manager, create a new ``exchange-manager.properties``

> configuration file on the coordinator, such as

Reviewer 4: It has to be etc/exchange-manager.properties

> ``etc/exchange-manager.properties`` configuration file on the coordinator. In

Author: Does the config file need to be on all nodes or just the coordinator?

Reviewer 4: All nodes.

Author: Got it, thanks. Clarified.

this file, set the ``exchange-manager.name`` configuration propertry to

> ``filesystem``, and additional configuration properties as needed for your

Reviewer 3: or, is that an example name? 

If so, that needs to be clarified.

> ``filesystem``, and additional configuration properties as needed for your

Reviewer 3: I ask because it feels like it is from an enum list

> ``filesystem``, and additional configuration properties as needed for your

Author: AFAIK it's correct for both. The exchange manager is pluggable so I imagine we'll see more `exchange-manager.name` values later on as people build more.

> ``filesystem``, and additional configuration properties as needed for your

Reviewer 4: It's for both.

storage solution.

.. list-table:: Exchange manager configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
   * - ``exchange.base-directory``
     - The base directory URI location that the exchange manager uses to store
       spooling data. Only supports S3 and local filesystems.
     -
   * - ``exchange.encryption-enabled``
     - Enable encrypting of spooling data.
     - ``false``
   * - ``exchange.sink-buffer-pool-min-size``
     - The minimum buffer pool size for an exchange sink. The larger the buffer
       pool size, the larger the write parallelism and memory usage.
     - ``10``
   * - ``exchange.source-concurrent-reader``
     - The number of concurrent readers to read from spooling storage. The
       larger the number of concurrent readers, the larger the read parallelism
       and memory usage.
     - ``4``

>    * - ``exchange.s3.aws-access-key``

Author: Required for AWS S3, specifically, not other S3 systems. Added that detail to clarify.

     - AWS access key to use.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.aws-secret-key``
     - AWS secret key to use.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.region``
     - Region of the S3 bucket.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.endpoint``
     - S3 storage endpoint server if using an S3-compatible storage system that
       is not AWS. If using AWS S3, can be ignored.
     -
   * - ``exchange.s3.max-error-retries``
     - Maximum number of times the exchange manager's S3 client should retry
       a request.
     - ``3``
   * - ``exchange.s3.upload.part-size``
     - Part size for S3 multi-part upload.
     - ``5MB``

The following example ``exchange-manager.properties`` configuration specifies an
AWS S3 bucket as the spooling storage destination. Note that the destination

> does not have to be in AWS, but can be any S3-compatible storage server.

Reviewer 4: server -> system

otherwise fails during query execution, the query fails and must be run again
manually. The longer the runtime of a query, the more likely it is to be
susceptible to such failures.

Fault-tolerant execution is a mechanism in Trino that enables a cluster to
mitigate query failures by retrying queries or their component tasks in
the event of failure. With fault-tolerant execution enabled, intermediate
exchange data is spooled and can be re-used by another worker in the event of a
worker outage or other fault during query execution.

.. note::

    Fault tolerance does not apply to broken queries or other user error. For
    example, Trino does not spend resources retrying a query that fails because
    its SQL cannot be parsed.

Configuration
-------------

Fault-tolerant execution is disabled by default. To enable the feature, set the
``retry-policy`` configuration property to either ``QUERY`` or ``TASK``
depending on the desired :ref:`retry policy <fte-retry-policy>`.

.. code-block:: properties

    retry-policy=QUERY

The following configuration properties control the behavior of fault-tolerant
execution on a Trino cluster:

> .. list-table:: Fault-tolerant execution configuration properties

Reviewer 2: These properties only apply for `retry-policy=TASK`

recommended when executing large batch queries, as the cluster can more
efficiently retry smaller tasks within the query rather than retry the whole
query.

``TASK`` retry policy requires a configured :ref:`exchange manager
<fte-exchange-manager>` to store spooled exchange data used for each task. It is
also strongly recommended to set the ``query.low-memory-killer.policy``
configuration property to ``total-reservation-on-blocked-nodes``, or queries may
need to be manually killed if the cluster runs out of memory.

Advanced configuration
----------------------

You can further configure fault-tolerant execution with the following
configuration properties. The default values for these properties should work
for most deployments, but you can change these values for testing or
troubleshooting purposes.

Retry limits
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following configuration properties control the thresholds at which
queries/tasks are no longer retried in the event of repeated failures:

.. list-table:: Fault tolerance retry limit configuration properties
   :widths: 30, 40, 30, 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property name
     - Description
     - Default value
     - Retry policy

>    * - ``query-retry-attempts``

Reviewer 2: This only applies for `retry_policy=QUERY`

     - Maximum number of times Trino may attempt to retry a query before
       declaring the query as failed.
     - ``4``
     - Only ``QUERY``

>    * - ``task-retry-attempts-overall``

Reviewer 2: This only applies for `retry_policy=TASK`

     - Maximum number retries across all tasks within a given query
       before declaring the query as failed.
     - ``null`` (no limit)
     - Only ``TASK``

>    * - ``task-retry-attempts-per-task``

Reviewer 2: This only applies for `retry_policy=TASK`

     - Maximum number of times Trino may attempt to retry a single task before
       declaring the query as failed.
     - ``2``
     - Only ``TASK``

>    * - ``retry-initial-delay``

Reviewer 2: This only applies for `retry_policy=QUERY`

     - Minimum time that a failed query must wait before it is retried. May be
       overridden with the ``retry_initial_delay`` :ref:`session property
       <session-properties-definition>`.
     - ``10s``
     - Only ``QUERY``

>    * - ``retry-max-delay``

Reviewer 2: This only applies for `retry_policy=QUERY`
